Update docs for data-aware scheduling (AKA "datasets"/AIP-48) (#26208)
mistercrunch/Airflow: docs/apache-airflow/concepts/datasets.rst

.. code-block:: python

    # valid datasets:
    schemeless = Dataset(uri="//example/dataset")
    csv_file = Dataset(uri="example.csv")

If required, an extra dictionary can be included in a Dataset:

.. code-block:: python

    example_dataset = Dataset(
        "s3://dataset/example.csv",
        extra={'team': 'trainees'},
    )

..note::

    Security Note: Dataset URI and extra fields are not encrypted, they are stored in cleartext, in Airflow's metadata database. Do NOT store any sensitive values, especially URL server credentials, in dataset URIs or extra key values!

How to use datasets in your DAGs
--------------------------------

You can use datasets to specify data dependencies in your DAGs. Take the following example:

.. code-block:: python

    example_dataset = Dataset("s3://dataset/example.csv")

    with DAG(dag_id='update_example_dataset', ...) as update_example_dataset:
        BashOperator(task_id='example_producer', outlets=[example_dataset], ...)

    with DAG(dag_id='example_consumer', schedule=[example_dataset], ...):
        BashOperator(...)

> Once the ``example_producer`` task of the first ``update_example_dataset`` DAG has completed successfully, Airflow schedules ``requires_example_dataset``. Only a task's success triggers dataset updates — if the task fails or if it raises an :class:`~airflow.exceptions.AirflowSkipException`, no update occurs, and the ``requires_example_dataset`` DAG will not be scheduled.

Author: I think `requires_example_dataset` should be `example_consumer`?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the ``example_producer`` task of the first ``update_example_dataset`` DAG has completed successfully, Airflow schedules ``example_consumer``. Only a task's success triggers dataset updates — if the task fails or if it raises an :class:`~airflow.exceptions.AirflowSkipException`, no update occurs, and the ``example_consumer`` DAG will not be scheduled.
```

Which dag id do people think is clearer? `example_consumer` or `requires_example_dataset`? (i.e. should we fix the prose or the code sample?)

Reviewer 2: I think we can probably drop `example_` everywhere too. e.g. use `dag_id=update-dataset` and `task_id=producer`?

Reviewer 2: I refactored this whole example. Take another look now.

    specific language governing permissions and limitations
    under the License.

Data-aware scheduling
=====================

.. versionadded:: 2.4

Quickstart
----------

In addition to scheduling DAGs based upon time, they can also be scheduled based upon a task updating a dataset.

.. code-block:: python

    from airflow import Dataset

    with DAG(...):
        MyOperator(
            # this task updates example.csv
            outlets=[Dataset("s3://dataset-bucket/example.csv")],
            ...,
        )

    with DAG(
        # this DAG should be run when example.csv is updated (by dag1)
        schedule=[Dataset("s3://dataset-bucket/example.csv")],
        ...,
    ):
        ...

What is a "dataset"?
--------------------

> An Airflow dataset is a stand-in for a logical grouping of data that flows through multiple DAGs, possibly being changed or updated by each one. Datasets are updated by upstream "producer" tasks, and dataset updates contribute to scheduling downstream "consumer" DAGs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An Airflow dataset is a stand-in for a logical grouping of data. Datasets may be updated by upstream "producer" tasks, and dataset updates contribute to scheduling downstream "consumer" DAGs.
```

> A dataset is a construct around a Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) that you create in your code:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A dataset is defined by a Uniform Resource Identifier (URI):
```

.. code-block:: python

    from airflow import Dataset

    example_dataset = Dataset('s3://dataset-bucket/example.csv')

> Airflow makes no assumptions about the content or location of the data represented by the identifier. It is treated as a string, so any use of regular expressions (eg ``input_\d+.csv``) or file glob patterns (eg ``input_2022*.csv``) as an attempt to create multiple datasets from one declaration will not work.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Airflow makes no assumptions about the content or location of the data represented by the URI. It is treated as a string, so any use of regular expressions (eg ``input_\d+.csv``) or file glob patterns (eg ``input_2022*.csv``) as an attempt to create multiple datasets from one declaration will not work.
```

> Airflow treats the dataset URI as an opaque value intended to be human-readable, and makes no assumptions about the content or location of the data represented by the identifier. It is treated as a string, so any use of regular expressions (eg ``input_\d+.csv``) or file glob patterns (eg ``input_2022*.csv``) as an attempt to create multiple datasets from one declaration will not work.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Airflow makes no assumptions about the content or location of the data represented by the identifier. It is treated as a string, so any use of regular expressions (eg ``input_\d+.csv``) or file glob patterns (eg ``input_2022*.csv``) as an attempt to create multiple datasets from one declaration will not work.
```

Reviewer 3: why: cus ... human readability is not necessarily a primary goal.  if this ultimately needs to line up with openlineage naming, then human readability may not be a goal at all.

> Airflow treats the dataset URI identifiers as opaque values intended to be human-readable, and makes no assumptions about the content or location of the data represented by the identifier. They are treated as strings, so any use of regular expressions (eg ``input_\d+.csv``) or file glob patterns (eg ``input_2022*.csv``) as an attempt to create multiple datasets from one declaration will not work.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Airflow treats the dataset URI as an opaque value intended to be human-readable, and makes no assumptions about the content or location of the data represented by the identifier. It is treated as a string, so any use of regular expressions (eg ``input_\d+.csv``) or file glob patterns (eg ``input_2022*.csv``) as an attempt to create multiple datasets from one declaration will not work.
```

> There are three restrictions on the dataset identifier:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are three restrictions on the dataset URI:
```

1. It must be a valid URI, which means it must only be composed of only ASCII characters.
2. The URI scheme cannot be ``airflow`` (this is reserved for future use).

> 3. It must be unique (although it is case is sensitive throughout, so "s3://example_dataset" and "s3://Example_Dataset" are considered different, and "s3://example_dataset" and "S3://example_dataset" are considered different).

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure the wording is right here? They don't have to be "unique", but casing needs to be consistent.

```suggestion
3. The URI is case is sensitive throughout, so "s3://example_dataset" and "s3://Example_Dataset" are considered different, and "s3://example_dataset" and "S3://example_dataset" are considered different.
```

I'm not even sure this is a restriction though?

If you try to use either of the examples below, your code will cause a ValueError to be raised, and Airflow will not import it.

.. code-block:: python

    # invalid datasets:
    reserved = Dataset(uri="airflow://example_dataset")
    not_ascii = Dataset(uri="èxample_datašet")

The identifier does not have to be an absolute URI, it can be a scheme-less, relative URI, or even just a simple path or string:

.. code-block:: python

    # valid datasets:
    schemeless = Dataset(uri="//example/dataset")
    csv_file = Dataset(uri="example.csv")

If required, an extra dictionary can be included in a Dataset:

.. code-block:: python

    example_dataset = Dataset(
        "s3://dataset/example.csv",
        extra={'team': 'trainees'},
    )

..note::

>     Security Note: Dataset URI and extra fields are not encrypted, they are stored in cleartext, in Airflow's metadata database. Do NOT store any sensitive values, especially URL server credentials, in dataset URIs or extra key values!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Security Note: Dataset URI and extra fields are not encrypted, they are stored in cleartext, in Airflow's metadata database. Do NOT store any sensitive values, especially credentials, in dataset URIs or extra key values!
```

How to use datasets in your DAGs
--------------------------------

You can use datasets to specify data dependencies in your DAGs. Take the following example:

.. code-block:: python

    example_dataset = Dataset("s3://dataset/example.csv")

    with DAG(dag_id='producer', ...):
        BashOperator(task_id='producer', outlets=[example_dataset], ...)

    with DAG(dag_id='consumer', schedule=[example_dataset], ...):
        ...

> Once the ``producer`` task in the ``producer`` DAG has completed successfully, Airflow schedules the ``consumer`` DAG. Only a task's success triggers dataset updates — if the task fails or if it raises an :class:`~airflow.exceptions.AirflowSkipException`, no update occurs, and the ``consumer`` DAG will not be scheduled.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once the ``producer`` task in the ``producer`` DAG has completed successfully, Airflow schedules the ``consumer`` DAG. A dataset will be marked as updated only if the task completes successfully — if the task fails or if it is skipped, no update occurs, and the ``consumer`` DAG will not be scheduled.
```

        e10 [pos="10,2!"]
        e11 [pos="11,1.5!"]
        e12 [pos="12,2!"]
        e13 [pos="13,2.5!"]
        r13 [pos="13,1!" shape=star width=0.25 height=0.25 fixedsize=shape]
      }
      {
        node [shape=none label="" width=0]
        end_ds1 [pos="14,2.5!"]
        end_ds2 [pos="14,2!"]
        end_ds3 [pos="14,1.5!"]
      }

      {
        node [shape=none margin=0.25  fontname="roboto,sans-serif"]
        example_dataset_1 [ pos="-0.5,2.5!"]
        example_dataset_2 [ pos="-0.5,2!"]
        example_dataset_3 [ pos="-0.5,1.5!"]
        dag_runs [label="DagRuns created" pos="-0.5,1!"]
      }

      edge [color=lightgrey]

      example_dataset_1 -- e1 -- e2       -- e4       -- e6                                        -- e13 -- end_ds1
      example_dataset_2             -- e3       -- e5             -- e8       -- e10        -- e12        -- end_ds2
      example_dataset_3                                     -- e7       -- e9        -- e11               -- end_ds3

    }

Notes on schedules
------------------

The ``schedule`` parameter to your DAG can take either a list of datasets to consume or a timetable-based option. The two cannot currently be mixed.

> When using datasets, in this first release (v2.4) waiting for all datasets in the list to be updated is the only option when multiple datasets are consumed by a DAG. A later release should introduce more fine-grained options allowing for greater flexibility.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When using datasets, in this first release (v2.4) waiting for all datasets in the list to be updated is the only option when multiple datasets are consumed by a DAG. A later release may introduce more fine-grained options allowing for greater flexibility.
```

This might make more sense as a note in the previous section, where it's more in-context

        ...

If one dataset is updated multiple times before all consumed datasets have been updated, the downstream DAG will still only be run once, as shown in this illustration:

.. ::

>     Asci art reprepsentation of this diagram

Author: ASCII

Reviewer: Top notch nit picking :D

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ACII art representation of this diagram
```

If one dataset is updated multiple times before all consumed datasets have been updated, the downstream DAG will still only be run once, as shown in this illustration:

.. ::

>     ACII art representation of this diagram

Author: Still ASCII 😁

Reviewer: 🤦🏻 

```suggestion
    ASCII art representation of this diagram
```
